Day1 : Bronze Layer Engineering Enhancement

0. Platform Architecture Overview
The ecommerce analytics platform follows the Medallion Architecture pattern:
Bronze  →  Silver  →  Gold
Bronze
Raw behavioural events preserved with minimal transformation.
Silver
Curated datasets with data quality enforcement and feature engineering.
Gold
Business-ready datasets and machine learning features.
The current implementation establishes the Bronze layer ingestion boundary.

1. Architectural Context

The Bronze layer establishes the ingestion boundary of the ecommerce analytics platform by preserving 
behavioural event data within governed Delta storage.The objective of this stage is controlled source 
preservation combined with operational reliability and reproducibility guarantees aligned with
Medallion Architecture principles.
No analytical transformation is introduced at this layer.


2. Objectives

Bronze implementation supports:
   immutable source preservation.
   auditability and rollback capability.
   reproducible experimentation.
   scalable downstream analytics.
   machine learning feature preparation.
Early-stage data mutation is intentionally minimized.


3. Dataset Consolidation

October and November ecommerce behavioural datasets were consolidated into a unified ingestion stream.
Dataset characteristics:
    approximately 110 million event records.
    standardized schema alignment across ingestion sources.
    consistent event-level representation.
Events capture user browsing behaviour, product interaction, and session activity.
No analytical filtering or enrichment was applied during consolidation.

4. Platform Constraint and Storage Strategy

Databricks Serverless environments disable public DBFS root access as part of platform governance controls.
Legacy path-based Delta writes (e.g., /delta/...) were therefore unsupported.Storage implementation
adopted Unity Catalog managed infrastructure.

Benefits:
   centralized metadata governance.
   fine-grained access control.
   persistent table registration.
   platform-native discoverability.
This approach aligns with modern cloud data platform deployment standards.



5. Bronze Layer Implementation Strategy
Bronze storage consists of two controlled datasets.

5.1 RAW Bronze Dataset
Table:  "workspace.ecommerce.bronze_events_raw"

Purpose:
   preserve ingestion output exactly as received.
   provide rollback reference state.
   support debugging and reprocessing workflows.
   maintain authoritative audit baseline.
No structural enhancement beyond ingestion mechanics was applied.

5.2 CLEAN Bronze Dataset

Table:  "workspace.ecommerce.bronze_events"

Purpose:
  provide structurally stable operational dataset.
  prepare ingestion output for downstream transformation.

Enhancements applied:
  timestamp datatype normalization.
  ingestion metadata capture.
  removal of fully empty records.
No business logic or analytical filtering was introduced.


6. Engineering Enhancements

Timestamp Normalization
"event_time" converted from string to timestamp datatype.
Enables:
   temporal aggregation.
   session reconstruction.
   streaming compatibility.

Ingestion Metadata Tracking
"ingestion_time" column introduced to capture system arrival time.
Supports:
   audit traceability.
   ingestion latency monitoring.
   operational SLA verification.

Event Date Partitioning
An event_date column derived from event_time was introduced
to support partition-based storage layout.
Benefits:
partition pruning during query execution.
reduced scan cost for time-bounded analysis.
improved scalability for large behavioural datasets.

Structural Sanitization
Fully empty records removed to eliminate ingestion artefacts without altering dataset semantics.


7. Storage Strategy

Bronze datasets were implemented as Unity Catalog managed Delta tables:
    workspace.ecommerce.bronze_events_raw
    workspace.ecommerce.bronze_events

Managed tables provide:
   transactional consistency.
   catalog discoverability.
   persistent metadata lifecycle management.

Tables remain accessible through SQL and Spark workloads.


8. Transactional Storage Selection — Delta Lake
Delta Lake introduces database-grade guarantees into the data lake environment.

Capabilities leveraged:

ACID Transactions
Prevent partial writes and ensure consistency during concurrent operations.

Time Travel
Enable historical dataset reconstruction and rollback recovery.

Schema Enforcement
Protect against unintended structural drift during ingestion evolution.

These guarantees support auditability and reproducible experimentation workflows.


9. Data Validation Checks

To ensure ingestion integrity, the following validation checks were executed:

Row Count Validation--
SELECT COUNT(*) 
FROM workspace.ecommerce.bronze_events

Result confirmed expected dataset size-- 109,950,743 events

Event Distribution Validation--

SELECT event_type, COUNT(*)
FROM workspace.ecommerce.bronze_events
GROUP BY event_type

Observed distribution--

view       ~104M
cart       ~3.9M
purchase   ~1.6M

Distribution matches expected ecommerce behavioural patterns and confirms dataset completeness.

Temporal Range Validation--

SELECT MIN(event_time), MAX(event_time)
FROM workspace.ecommerce.bronze_events

Confirms dataset coverage from--

2019-10-01 → 2019-11-30



10. Operational Guarantees Established

Bronze now provides:
  version-controlled storage.
  snapshot isolation.
  rollback safety.
  ingestion audit traceability.
  deterministic dataset reconstruction.
These guarantees establish Bronze as a stable operational baseline.


11. Medallion Architecture Boundary

The following were intentionally excluded from Bronze:
  domain filtering.
  analytical aggregation.
  business-rule deduplication.
  feature engineering.
Such transformations are deferred to Silver and Gold layers.



12. Forward Compatibility

Design decisions support future platform evolution including:
  incremental ingestion workflows.
  schema evolution management.
  Silver data quality enforcement.
  feature store integration.
  lineage observability tooling.
Bronze acts as a scalable ingestion foundation.


13. Outcome

Day 1  implementation successfully established the governed ingestion 
layer of the ecommerce data platform.Behavioural event data is now preserved within Delta Lake under Unity Catalog governance, 
ensuring transactional consistency, auditability, and reproducible downstream experimentation.
This ingestion foundation enables reliable transformation pipelines, scalable
analytical workloads, and future machine learning feature engineering workflows.








